The simplest and most common model of friction
is called linear friction, sometimes also
called viscous friction or viscous damping.
Then, the force or the torque is proportional
to velocity. So, there are two cases. We can
consider a linear case where we have friction
force proportional to velocity, v, or we
can have the rotational case where a frictional
torque, tau, is proportional to the rotational
speed, omega. If we plot force against velocity,
we can represent the characteristic of friction
by a straight line of slope B and refer to
B as the friction coefficient.
Typically, the slope of the line for positive
and negative velocities is the same. Here
is the model for a current controlled electric
motor that we introduced earlier. It relates
the rotation acceleration to the applied current.
And, I’m going to add a frictional torque
term here. And, friction is a real issue in
most electric motors. The friction is due
to the bearings that the shaft rotates within.
And, for motors with brushes this represents the
frictional force of the brushes rubbing on
the motor’s Commutator.
I can rearrange the equation to look like
this and then I can transform it and put it
into transfer function form. So, here we
have the transfer function for an electric
motor and it incorporates the motor torque
constant, the inertia of the motor and the
friction of the motor. Some systems exhibit
a nonlinear friction and the most classic
case of this is known as Coulomb friction
and this is named after a famous French physicist
who also did a lot of work in electrostatics
and the unit of electric charge is named after
this same gentleman.
Like the linear friction we looked at before,
the nonlinear friction force always opposes
the direction of motion.
Interestingly, Coulomb friction is not defined
for the case of zero velocity. We define the
amount of friction when the mechanism is moving
in the positive direction and when the mechanism
is moving in the negative direction, and these
values may be the same or they may be different.
It depends on the mechanism.
For a real machine, friction is actually a
combination of both these two effects, the
nonlinear Coulomb friction and the linear
friction. Once again, this friction curve
is not defined for the case of zero velocity.
These two terms may be the same or different
and the slope of the line for positive and
negative velocities may be the same or it
may be different. Once again, it depends on
the particular machine.